# Development Guidelines

This document outlines the workflow and coding standards for contributing to the Sensing Garden dashboard.

## Setup

### Prerequisites

- Node.js (https://nodejs.org/en/download)
- pnpm (https://pnpm.io/installation)

### Getting Started

1. **Clone** the repository.
2. **Environment:** Add environment variables to `.env`.
3. **Install:** Run `pnpm i` in the root folder to install dependencies.
4. **Run:** Run `pnpm dev` to start the local development server.

### Tooling

- **VS Code:** Install the recommended extensions from `.vscode/extensions.json`. Project settings in `.vscode/settings.json` are meant to simplify and speed up development.
- **Git Hooks:** We use `sipmle-git-hooks` for pre-commit hooks. Linting and formatting are automatically enforced on every commit. If a commit fails, resolve the linting errors before retrying.

### Testing

The first time you run tests using `pnpm test`, `pnpm coverage`, etc., you might need to follow some instructions to finish the installation of playwright. If so, these instructions will be shown in the terminal. Also remember to always check that all tests pass with `pnpm test` and generate a new coverage report with `pnpm coverage` after making changes.

## Coding Standards

### Components

If files get too long or you're reusing parts of your code, move the code into its own component. Components are placed in a sensible folder under `src/components/`. E.g., the component for filtering by prediction confidence is at `src/components/filters/ConfidenceFilter.tsx`. Component names should use **PascalCase**

### External Components

Before creating a new component, it's recommended to check [shadcn/ui](https://ui.shadcn.com/docs/components) for the component you're looking for. When adding new components, follow our specific configuration to maintain consistency:

1.  **Source:** Get external components from [shadcn/ui](https://ui.shadcn.com/docs/components)
2.  **Select:** Make sure to select the **Base UI** version over Radix UI.
3.  **Install:** Follow the installation guide **manual** installation of the component.
4.  **Refactor:** After adding a component, update the file to match our codebase standards:
    - **Location:** All external compoennts are placed in `src/components/ui/`.
    - **Naming:** Ensure the file uses **PascalCase**.
    - **Directives:** Remove the `"use client"` directive.
    - **Imports:** Fix paths and resolve all linting errors.

### Icons

We exclusively use **Lucide icons**. All Lucide icons are already installed. Find the icon you want to use at https://lucide.dev/icons/, then add the corresponding component to your code. Always use components ending in **Icon** for better consistency across the project. (All icons have a version with and without Icon, e.g. `<ChevronLeftIcon />` vs `<ChevronLeft />`)

### Data Fetching

When fetching data, use [TanStack Query](https://tanstack.com/query/latest). Create a hook for your query, placed under `src/lib/hooks/`. Look at the documentation for detailed info, or check `src/lib/hooks/useObservations.ts` for a simple example. Types used to get data from the Sensing Garden backend API are placed in `src/lib/types/api.ts`.

### Other

- When exporting content from a file, use `export { ... }` at the end of the file instead of inline exports to make it clear what the file exports. (This does not apply to the `Route` component for all files under `src/routes/`)
- It's important to keep **type safety**. Do not use `any` or `unknown` unless necessary, and try to as specific as possible. E.g., create an `interface` for your function instead of `Record<string, string>`.
- Use TailwindCSS, `className`, over inline CSS, `style`.
- Prefer using our custom TailwindCSS classes where possible. Try not to use classes like `text-zinc-400`, instead using `text-muted-foreground`, to keep consistent styling across the dashboard.

## Project Structure

- `public/`: Static assets
- `src/`: Source code
  - `routes/`: Tanstack router file-based route tree
  - `components/`: React components
    - `ui/`: Generic reusable components
  - `lib/`: Shared utility functions
- `tests/`: Tests
  - `component/`: Component tests
  - `e2e/`: End-to-end tests
- `coverage/`: Test coverage report generated by running `pnpm coverage`

## Contributing

- **Branching:** Use descriptive branch names (e.g., `feat/login`, `fix/broken-slider`).
- **Commit Messages:** Follow [conventional commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/).
- **Pull Request:** Create a pull request with your changes. Target branch should be `dev` unless you have a good reason for not selecting it.
- **Testing:** Ensure all tests pass after making your changes.
- **Review:** All pull requests must be reviewed by at least 1 other team member.
